Blog on github as one-stop-shop (#11)
ministryofjustice/data-and-analytics-engineering: src/content/blog/posts/github-one-stop-shop.md

### Epics

[Epics](https://theproductmanager.com/topics/agile-epic/) are often used to structure agile backlogs and to break down large issues into more manageable work. GitHub offers three options for managing epics:

#### 1. Task lists

[Task lists](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting/about-task-lists) have been around since [2014](https://github.blog/2013-01-09-task-lists-in-gfm-issues-pulls-comments/). GitHub is currently working on [a significant upgrade](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/managing-your-tasks-with-tasklists) which is still in private beta, so stay tuned for updates!

You can link to issues, pull requests and discussions within the same repository using the simple `#number` pattern: 

```
- [x] #739
- [ ] https://github.com/octo-org/octo-repo/issues/740
- [ ] Add delight to the experience when all tasks are complete :tada:
```

> <img src="https://docs.github.com/assets/cb-127417/mw-1440/images/help/writing/task-list-rendered.webp" width="40%" height="40%">

Author: Done

1. Generate a ticket for each artefact that needs to be migrated
1. Replace the `status` field with the different actions
1. Use the project board layout to track progress

The advantages are many:

- Assign tickets to GitHub user accounts, instead of named individuals
- Use a single issue to track progress and communication
- Take advantage of [GitHub automation](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/planning-and-tracking-with-projects/automating-your-project)

# Project Documentation

Documentation about your project can take many forms, which needs to be recorded and managed differently depending on the audience and use case.

### Documentation about your code

This is obvious and should reside in your code. Good code documentation practice is outside the scope of this article. You can refer to [this article](https://swimm.io/learn/code-documentation/documentation-in-python-methods-and-best-practices) for some great pointers on documenting python code.

### Documentation about your project  

> This includes architecture, dependencies, setup instructions and user guidance. You should keep this information in GitHub as Markdown files in a `/docs` folder in your GitHub repository. An alternative is [GitHub wikis](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/documenting-your-project-with-wikis), as has been successfully achieved [here](https://github.com/AstroBookings/.github/wiki). However I would not recommend for reasons which are best summarised in this [article](https://michaelheap.com/github-wiki-is-an-antipattern/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes architecture, dependencies, setup instructions and user guidance. You can keep this information in GitHub as Markdown files in your GitHub repository's `/docs` folder. An alternative is to use [GitHub wikis](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/documenting-your-project-with-wikis), as has been successfully achieved [here](https://github.com/AstroBookings/.github/wiki). However, I would not recommend them for reasons best summarised in this [article](https://michaelheap.com/github-wiki-is-an-antipattern/). 
```

> GitHub uses a variant of Markdown called [GitHub Flavored Markdown](https://docs.github.com/en/contributing/writing-for-github-docs/using-markdown-and-liquid-in-github-docs). It also uses [Liquid](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/basics/introduction/) syntax to expand the functionality for example to provide accessible tables and chunks of reusable content. However the [basics](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax) should suffice for most needs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitHub uses a variant of Markdown called [GitHub Flavored Markdown](https://docs.github.com/en/contributing/writing-for-github-docs/using-markdown-and-liquid-in-github-docs). It also uses [Liquid](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/basics/introduction/) syntax to expand the functionality, for example, to provide accessible tables and chunks of reusable content. However, the [basics](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax) should suffice for most needs. 
```

> You can convert your documentation into a website using static site generators such as [mkdocs-material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) and host on [GitHub Pages](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/getting-started-with-github-pages/about-github-pages), GitHub's static site hosting service. Documentation websites are probably more relevant for external-facing documentation. It's advisable to stick with basic markdown formatting syntax to ensure compatibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can convert your documentation into a website, using static site generators such as [Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/), and host it on [GitHub Pages](https://docs.github.com/en/pages/getting-started-with-github-pages/about-github-pages), GitHub's static site hosting service. Documentation websites are probably more relevant for external-facing documentation. It's advisable to stick with basic markdown formatting syntax to ensure compatibility.
```

> Whilst it's recommended for documentation to go through the same review process as code, it can sometimes feel onerous. You can modify the [codeowners](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-code-owners) to skip the approval process for changes to the `/docs` folder. You can also modify [GitHub workflows](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#onpull_requestpull_request_targetbranchesbranches-ignore) to skip the workflow, which is useful in the case of long running tests.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whilst it's recommended for documentation to go through the same review process as code, it can sometimes feel onerous. You can modify the [codeowners](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-code-owners) to skip the approval process for changes to the `/docs` folder. You can also modify [GitHub workflows](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#onpull_requestpull_request_targetbranchesbranches-ignore) to skip the workflow, which is useful in the case of long-running tests.  
```

A few things to note about structuring the `/docs` folder:

> - With a monorepo layout, you can split off into multiple `/docs` folders at the root of each sub-folder, but this can make it more complex to manage and navigate
> - With a multi-repo approach, you can use the 'core' repository or create a 'docs' repository for documenting team or application level documentation. You can't combine code and documentation changes made against different repositories in a single pull request, but you can still link them via a task list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. With a monorepo layout, you can split off into multiple `/docs` folders at the root of each sub-folder, but this can make it more complex to manage and navigate.
2. With a multi-repo approach, you can use the core repository or create a specific documentation repository for storing team or application-level documentation. You can't combine code and documentation changes made against different repositories in a single pull request but you can still link them via a task list.
```

### Documentation about your approach

When you're evaluating options or completing some analysis you often create transient documentation. This type of documentation should be kept separate from your code to avoid clutter and confusion, especially for new team members. Your `/docs` folder should reflect the current state of your project, just like your code.

> Instead, you can use [GitHub Discussions](https://docs.github.com/en/discussions/collaborating-with-your-community-using-discussions/about-discussions) which was released in [August 2021](https://github.blog/2021-08-17-github-discussions-out-of-beta/). Discussions are not enabled by default so you'll have to update the [repository settings](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/enabling-features-for-your-repository/enabling-or-disabling-github-discussions-for-a-repository). If you use a multi-repo approach, you can limit discussions to the core or docs repository to make it easier to track and search.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, you can use [GitHub Discussions](https://docs.github.com/en/discussions/collaborating-with-your-community-using-discussions/about-discussions), which was released in [August 2021](https://github.blog/2021-08-17-github-discussions-out-of-beta/). Discussions are not enabled by default so you'll have to update the [repository settings](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/enabling-features-for-your-repository/enabling-or-disabling-github-discussions-for-a-repository). If you use a multi-repo approach, you can limit discussions to the core or documentation repository to make it easier to track and search.
```

> Unlike the `/docs` folder, discussions don't require approvals. Whilst it simplifies the workflow, it does mean that discussions can become an 'information swamp'. Hence you need a process for transferring sanitised information to the `/docs` folder. Luckily GitHub Discussions support the same [advanced formatting](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting) as Markdown pages, which makes it easy to copy and paste. I recommend closing a discussion once the information has been migrated to the `/docs` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the `/docs` folder, discussions don't require approvals. Whilst it simplifies the workflow, it does mean that discussions can become an information swamp. Hence you need a process for transferring sanitised information to the `/docs` folder. Luckily GitHub Discussions support the same [advanced formatting](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting) as Markdown pages, which makes it easy to copy and paste. I recommend closing a discussion once the information has been migrated to the `/docs` folder.
```

> GitHub Discussions allows your users to [participate](https://docs.github.com/en/discussions/collaborating-with-your-community-using-discussions/participating-in-a-discussion) with the idea generation process through comments, reactions and polls. However, this means everyone involved will need to check their GitHub notifications regularly. It can also cause confusion if you already use another communication medium e.g. Slack. A good rule of thumb is to consider whether you might want to refer to this information in a year's time. If so, use a discussion!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitHub Discussions allow your users to [participate](https://docs.github.com/en/discussions/collaborating-with-your-community-using-discussions/participating-in-a-discussion) with the idea generation process through comments, reactions and polls. However, this means everyone involved will need to check their GitHub notifications regularly. It can also cause confusion if you already use another communication tool, such as Slack. A good rule of thumb is to consider whether you might want to refer to this information in a year's time. If so, use a discussion!
```

### Diagrams

> [Mermaid](https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid#readme) is a JavaScript-based tool that lets you create diagrams using a Markdown-like syntax. GitHub released support for Mermaid in [February 2022](https://github.blog/2022-02-14-include-diagrams-markdown-files-mermaid/). It's particularly handy for adding editable diagrams to places like issues and discussions, as you don't have to save it to the `/docs` folder. However I found that Mermaid has a steep learning curve and limited options available so I would only suggest for simple diagrams. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Mermaid](https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid#readme) is a JavaScript-based tool that lets you create diagrams using a Markdown-like syntax. GitHub released support for Mermaid in [February 2022](https://github.blog/2022-02-14-include-diagrams-markdown-files-mermaid/). It's particularly handy for adding editable diagrams to places like issues and discussions, as you don't have to save it to the `/docs` folder. However, I found that Mermaid has a steep learning curve and limited options available so I would only suggest it for simple diagrams. 
```

> Instead, I recommend using [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/), an open-source diagramming and whiteboarding tool. GitHub doesn't provide native support for Excalidraw, but you can export the diagram to SVG or PNG and embed the Excalidraw [scene data](https://kevinjalbert.com/using-excalidraws-embedded-scene-feature-for-collaborative-diagramming/) to make it editable. Whilst SVG is preferable because it is smaller in size and text-based (hence diffable), unfortunately it doesn't [render as nicely in GitHub](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/4855) so I would stick with PNG for now. You can then upload the image file directly to issues and discussions, or save to a `/docs/images` folder for version control. GitHub has a nifty [image view mode](https://github.blog/2011-03-21-behold-image-view-modes/) for reviewing changes to images. You can edit diagrams on the Excalidraw web editor or download the [VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=pomdtr.excalidraw-editor) to edit locally. You can also import diagrams directly from GitHub into the web editor by passing in the raw image url (see my Excalidraw diagram hyperlink as an example). Lastly, Excalidraw plus GitHub Discussions is great for recording the outcome of collaborative whiteboard sessions, which tend to get lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, I recommend using [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/), an open-source diagramming and whiteboarding tool. GitHub doesn't provide native support for Excalidraw, but you can export the diagram to SVG or PNG and [embed the Excalidraw scene data](https://kevinjalbert.com/using-excalidraws-embedded-scene-feature-for-collaborative-diagramming/) to make it editable. Whilst SVG is preferable because it is smaller in size and is text-based (and hence diffable), unfortunately, it doesn't [render as nicely in GitHub](https://github.com/excalidraw/excalidraw/issues/4855) so I would stick with PNG for now. You can then upload the image file directly to issues and discussions, or save it to a `/docs/images` folder for version control. GitHub has a nifty [image view mode](https://github.blog/2011-03-21-behold-image-view-modes/) for reviewing changes to images. You can edit diagrams on the Excalidraw web editor or download the [VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=pomdtr.excalidraw-editor) to edit locally. You can also import diagrams directly from GitHub into the web editor by passing in the raw image URL (see my Excalidraw diagram hyperlink as an example). Lastly, Excalidraw plus GitHub Discussions is great for recording the outcome of collaborative whiteboard sessions, which tend to get lost.
```

While there's a bit of a learning curve, once you've decided on a format, it's very intuitive. We've successfully used Marp to create slide decks when [evaluating Iceberg](https://github.com/moj-analytical-services/iceberg-evaluation/tree/main/docs/presentations). Additionally, I've exported the `README.md` to HTML and hosted it on [GitHub Pages](https://moj-analytical-services.github.io/iceberg-evaluation/) for better visibility. Note that you shouldn't commit [generated files](https://homes.cs.washington.edu/~mernst/advice/version-control.html), but it's fine for exploratory projects. For production code, you should use something like the [marp-to-pages](https://github.com/ralexander-phi/marp-to-pages/blob/main/.github/workflows/marp-to-pages.yml) GitHub action, which generates PDF and HTML files as part of a pull request or merge.

# Conclusion

> Historically, GitHub has been mainly valued for source code management. Recent enhancements to the GitHub ecosystem, coupled with various open-source tools, make it possible to integrate code, automation, tracking, and documentation within one platform. While there may be initial challenges, the long-term benefits include increased efficiency, consistency, and transparency.

Reviewer: As we discussed earlier, could you add a small extra paragraph along the lines of... We've found this set-up beneficial when we've tried it but it may not work in all circumstances.

Author: done
